[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So how I got into this field
was I started out as a computer
engineer, moved
to Silicon Valley,
tried to start a company.
And immediately, I realized that
my timing, in a word, sucked.
The dot.com bubble
exploded within months
of me getting there.
And I and 14,000 other people
were laid off in April of 2001.
I was also trying
to start a company.
I lost all my money.
And at a certain point, the only
job I could get in the Valley
was essentially a job that
was dialing for dollars.
I would have to call up law
firms and sell them technology
to manage their firms.
And the economy was so
bad, companies were not
even paying a base salary.
So if you did not close a
sale, you did not get paid.
Now, in that state of
desperation, of pure misery,
I remember getting online
on 2002's version of Google
and searching for some hope.
Now, I can't remember
what I put in.
Maybe it was how
to succeed at work.
Maybe it was why does
life suck so bad?
But what I discovered
was meditation.
So I flew to LA, took my
first meditation class.
And when I came back to
work, interesting things
started happening.
Within one week, I
doubled my sales.
And as I continued diving more
into the application of this
what I now call transcendent
practices, which includes
things such as
positive statements,
creative visualization,
mindfulness--
as I started applying
this in my work,
I continued growing and
growing and growing.
Four months later, I had
been promoted three times,
was made director of sales, and
asked to run the company's New
York office.
And so I did that for 18 months.
And then I decided I wanted
to do more with my life.
And I thought,
well, Nelson Mandela
said, if you want to change
the world, change education.
And I asked myself,
why is it that all
of these incredible
practices that I had learned,
from mindfulness, to meditation,
to creative visualization,
why did I only learn
them in my 20s?
Why was this not
taught in schools?
And so I thought,
well, look, if I'm
going to tackle education
to change the world,
I want to teach meditation.
And that's how
mindvalley started.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So the big mistake
that many people make
is that we don't set
goals or define success
based on our own self
identity but based on what
I call the culturescape.
The culturescape is that
tangled web of rituals, habits,
beliefs, mythologies,
practices that our culture,
our religions, our
countries, through schooling,
through education,
through media infuse us
in terms of what is the right
way to function in the world.
Now, post-World War
II, the culturescape
was really about rebuilding,
about being safe.
But in today's
world, we are safe.
And so in today's world,
the millennial generation,
the big thing that they want
to pursue is self-discovery,
is creation.
The problem is the culturescape
keeps engulfing us and telling
us that we need
a college degree,
we need to get a good career,
we need to work the 9:00 to 5:00
we need to make sure our GPAs
are good enough so we can get
into graduate school so we can
get that law degree so we can
make partner in that
law firm so we can
have 2.5 cars in a garage,
a wife, and two kids,
and then work from 9:00
to 5:00, slave for a wage
so we can save so that
someday when we are 60,
we can finally retire
and see the world.
But the thing is, those
rules don't apply anymore.
The culturescape was
designed to keep us safe,
but it was never designed
to keep us happy.
And so great
thinkers, people who
are leading extraordinary
lives, question.
They question the
rules that were
infused into them as children.
True religion, true media, true
fathers, mothers, teachers,
preachers, they question, and
they create their own rules.
Hunter S. Thompson, the
American writer, in 1953,
was asked to write a
letter to a friend.
His friend was
asking for advice.
And I remember something really
beautiful in that letter that
has now become legendary.
Hunter says the big
danger with goal-setting
is that we aren't
setting our own goals,
we're setting goals that
society said we should set.
And so what he suggests is that
we do not conform ourselves
to society's state of goals, the
culturescape's state of goals.
Instead, we make those
goals conform to us,
to what our soul
wants to discover,
to what we want to
experience on Planet Earth.
The danger with goal-setting
is very often the goals
that you set are not your goals.
They are the
culturescape's definition
of how you are meant to
be safe in the world.
But that is one of the
surest paths the misery,
to waking up one day at
the age of 40 going, what
the hell happened to my life?
And so we always
have to question.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So here's why I believe
happiness is so important.
Our culturescape has taught
us an if-then version
of happiness.
If I get this job,
then I will be happy.
If I get this girl,
But there is a
problem with that.
The problem with that is
that happiness, you see,
is not a byproduct
of getting something.
Happiness is a state of being.
And happiness is not what you
get from achieving your goal.
Happiness is rocket
fuel towards your goal.
If you look at the latest study
coming in from psychologists
like Shawn Achor, who wrote
the book "Happiness Advantage,"
happiness moves you
towards your goals.
Happiness increases
your productivity.
Doctors who are
primed to be happy
are 19% better at
performing diagnoses.
Salespeople who
are more optimistic
are 50% better than
pessimistic salespeople.
Students do better
on their tests
when they are
primed to be happy.
You see, happiness is not
the result of getting a goal.
Happiness is rocket
fuel towards your goal.
So the trick, the real
trick to success in life
is not to not set goals.
It's to have these goals, but
to untangle your happiness
from these goals, to be
happy before you attain them,
to use that happiness as a
fuel so that, day to day,
as you are pursuing these
goals, which can get tricky,
which can get challenging, that
happiness is like your ally.
It moves you along.
That helps dampen the downsides
of occasional obstacles
or failure that
carries you forward,
that puts you in an
optimistic level of mind
so you attract the
right people, you
can work with the right
people to pursue your goal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So the last time I
checked, which was 2015,
there were 1,400
different studies
on the power of
meditation, everything
from helping reduce the
onset of heart disease,
to helping improve your skin,
to improving productivity,
to improving
compassion and empathy.
So meditation is one
of those powerful tools
that any human being can
bring in their life to improve
their functioning in the world.
The thing is we don't
know why meditation works.
Nobody has yet figured
out the exact reasons
why meditation causes
all of these feelings.
There are theories, but no
one has really boiled it down.
But just because we
don't know why it works
doesn't mean we can't use it.
I mean, for the longest
time, human beings
had no idea what the sun was.
Ancient cultures thought it
was a god or a giant fireball.
But we could still use
the sun for agriculture,
for navigation, for warmth,
for direction, for heat.
Likewise, we don't know
why meditation works.
But 1,400 studies have now shown
that meditation pretty much
enhances so many multiple
dimensions of human living
that every single
human being should
be making this part of
their daily practice.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When we are children, we
have this thing in our head
that I call the
meaning-making machine.
We are little, tiny humans
trying to figure out the world.
And a meaning-making
machine tries
to grant meaning to everything
that happens in our lives.
Our mom or our dad yell at
us or send us to a corner.
And we may not necessarily
get the meaning
that they are trying
to install on us.
They may simply be trying
to make us more disciplined.
We may take on our own meanings.
Mom wants me in a corner because
I'm not important to her.
Dad asks me to be quiet
because he doesn't
want to hear what I
have to say because what
I say isn't important.
Mom doesn't want
to talk to me today
because she doesn't love me.
See, kids don't
have adult brains.
They are children.
But this meaning-making
machine creates these meanings
that stick with them,
infuse into them,
and stay with them
into adulthood.
And so all of us
go into adulthood
with bad meanings
around the world.
And some of the most
common meanings, according
to psychologists and therapists
like Marisa Peer or Shelly
Lefkoe are the ideas that
I am not good enough.
I am not important.
I am not loved.
What I have to say
is not important.
And these things
hold us back in life.
So much of what we do
as adults is really
to try to patch
these holes which
we have been carrying with
us for the longest times.
Because we don't
think we are lovable,
we try to seek love
from other people.
We become needy in relationships
or become desperate
for attention or
love, not realizing
that everything we need in terms
of love can come from within.
And all of that
could have emerged
from a tiny incident
in childhood
where you felt that your
father or mother said or did
something that made you believe
that maybe they didn't love you
as much as you thought.
And so all human beings
grow up in a world
where, sadly, they've had
holes infused in them.
And the journey
to personal growth
is really being able
to go from having
these holes to becoming whole.
And that's why it's
so important for us
to ensure that we are looking
within to identify what beliefs
we have about ourselves
and our world,
and being able to ask
ourselves, is this really true.
And as parents,
when we are dealing
with kids, the single
most important thing
to ask yourself in any
interaction with your child,
according to psychologist
Shelly Lefkoe,
is what meaning is my child
going to take away from this?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think fear is a
really natural, normal,
human instinct fear is what
kept us safe for so long.
I mean, if we did not have
fear, probably the human species
would not be where it
is today because we
would have all killed
ourselves trying
to get too close to tigers.
But here's something to realize.
In today's world, we
are primarily safe.
And I remember reading a
really interesting story
about Elon Musk.
So Elon Musk, as you
know, is probably
one of the most prominent
entrepreneurs on the planet
today.
He's trying to get
mankind to Mars.
He's trying to move humanity
to an alternative energy
system with his Tesla cars.
And in an interview with Neil
deGrasse Tyson on a podcast,
Neil deGrasse Tyson
asked Elon Musk,
how is he so
confident, so fearless.
And Elon spoke about how once,
when he was a college kid,
he tried an experiment.
He tried to see if he
could live on $1 a day.
And living in America,
well, you can go to Walmart
and buy really crappy yet enough
food to survive for $1 a day.
Elon was able to pull this off.
So he was able to live
on $1 a day for 30 days.
And he said when he
figured that was possible,
all fear disappeared because
look, you can't get a job,
no problem.
You're going to survive.
When your basic need for
survival, which, 300 years ago,
we couldn't guarantee to kids
and adults, but today, we can--
when the basic need for survival
is pretty much guaranteed,
your fear is able to dissolve.
And so people who
are fearless often
have come to realize that
the basic need for survival
is taken care of.
Now, what can you do?
Now, once your basic
need for survival
is taken care of, what
helps mitigate fear and move
fear away is often
living on purpose.
You see, people who live on
purpose understand this rule,
that there is no good
or no bad that happens
to you in the world.
Nothing is good.
Nothing is bad.
Everything is just so.
The only question you
want to ask yourself
is, am I aligned
with my purpose?
Is what I'm doing
true to my purpose?
Now, the thing is we
are not omnisentient.
We don't know if any
action we are taking
is always the right action.
But the point is,
we take it anyway,
trusting that if it isn't
the right action, it's fine.
It will teach us, or
through that failure,
we will learn something
that lets us correct,
and correct again,
and correct again.
So if this is your goal and
this is where you are right now,
people who are living
on purpose are not
looking to get there
in a straight line.
They know that they
may make a wrong bet.
They may start a
company, and it may fail.
They may marry someone, and
that may end in divorce.
But each of these are simply
micro corrections where
they are learning something.
And these corrections
still eventually get them
to the goal.
Now, Michael Beckwith
thought me a model
which is really interesting.
It's called kensho
versus satori.
When you're living life, moving
towards a particular purpose,
there are two very important
things to understand.
Life helps us grow,
and correct, and evolve
through kensho, which
is growth by pain,
or satori, which is
growth by insight.
Every now and then, you
will have a satori moment,
a sudden awakening, a eureka
moment, an insight that
helps you move forward.
But for most people, that isn't
really going to be as easy.
Most of us grow through kensho.
Kensho is growth from pain.
You fall sick and
end up hospitalized,
but you emerge with new-found
respect for your body
and making new
choices in how you're
going to treat your health.
You start a business,
and it fails.
And it's painful.
But that's kensho
because now you
know what not to do
in your next business.
A relationship dissolves, and
you experience heartbreak.
But that's kensho
because now you
know the man or woman you
need to evolve to create
even better relationships.
So when you see life as satori
moments, sudden awakenings,
and kensho, growth
through pain, fear
dissolves because you know that
even when something bad happens
to you, it's simply a
friendly universe giving you
a lesson or fine tuning
and tweaking your direction
so you can get to your
purpose even faster.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So there are many
different ideas and models
to help you find your purpose.
One of the best
models I've learned
comes from a writer called
Amir Ahmad Nasr, who is
a Sudanese refugee in Canada.
And I was talking to Amir.
And he showed me how often
the pain that we go through
during our childhood,
during our growth periods
is really a sign of what
our greater purpose is.
So think back to a time
when you were growing up.
What was it that
really frustrated you?
What angered you
about the world?
I can tell you
what it was for me.
I grew up in the
country of Malaysia.
And I grew up in a Hindu
family in a Muslim country.
And I remember going to school,
a public government school,
and seeing the amount of
racism that I encountered.
I looked different
from the other kids
because I was a small minority
in terms of my ethnicity.
I remember being bullied,
being called names
because I looked different.
I remember a scene from class
when I was nine years old,
when a teacher was teaching
the entire classroom how
we should not trust Americans
because they are bad people.
And I remember growing up
on American television,
thinking to myself,
that's absolute rubbish,
as a nine-year-old.
I experienced racism.
I was indoctrinated with ideas
of distrusting other cultures.
And so when I grew up and I
actually moved to America,
I understood just
what diversity meant.
I understood how much
brainwashing kids in my country
were going through
in the '70s and '80s.
And I decided to dedicate
my life to take that anger
and fuel it into doing
something constructive.
So I joined a
non-profit organization
called ISAC, which takes
students from around the world,
exchanges them across
countries to create
cross-cultural understanding.
That pain as a child
helped me discover a value.
And that value is
world-centrism.
Now, that value helped me
discover my purpose, which
is starting companies and
businesses that help connect
the world.
And so after my
non-profit days, when
I started my next company,
which was mindvalley,
I made sure to create a
company that was truly diverse.
Today, in our office,
we employ people
from 40 different countries,
40 different nationalities
and passport holders
in one office.
But that would not
be so, I would not
be doing work to unify cultures
to build a global business
whose number one
value is connectedness
if I did not go through all
of that pain in childhood
in a schooling system
that was filled
with racism and prejudice.
So think back of that pain that
you went through as a child.
And I don't know what
that was for you.
But in that pain are the
clues to what your purpose is.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So I think there's a big
difference between goals,
happiness, and fulfillment.
Our culture gets this wrong.
We are told that you need goals.
And when you attain these
goals, you become happy.
None of that really matters.
It turns out what we truly
want is not happiness.
What we want is fulfillment.
And there is a difference.
Fulfillment is beyond happiness.
Fulfillment is being able
to look back and go, wow,
I led a really
extraordinary life.
Now, there are three things,
three types of pursuits
that bring us fulfillment.
And I'm really looking at
this from the point of view
that we are souls here in a meat
body on a giant rock hurtling
through space having
a human experience.
So the three things are this.
The first is human experiences.
And experiences are
not necessarily things
that money can buy.
An experience could be a kiss
with someone you really love.
It could be holding a child,
your child, in your arms.
It could be an extreme sport,
or eating of food that you so
enjoy, or laughing with friends.
You do not need money for
many of these experiences.
And so the first
question you want
to ask yourself is not what
goals do I want in life,
because goals may
not necessarily lead
to happiness or fulfillment.
The first question you
want to ask yourself
is, what experiences do I want?
But there's a second question.
The second thing that causes
our souls to get fulfilled
is growth.
I believe that one of
the reasons we are here
is to grow and evolve.
So the second question
you want to ask yourself
is, how am I going to grow?
And this is where you
want to actually make
a list of all the
opportunities and ways you
want to grow as a human being.
It could be learning
a new language.
a new skill.
It could be learning
public speaking,
learning to be a better parent.
It could be learning
mindfulness, or meditation,
or creative visualization,
or harnessing your intuition.
But we gain fulfillment
from growth.
But there is a third question.
That third question is, look,
if I was a human being who
had all of these
beautiful experiences, who
has grown in all of
these amazing ways,
how can I give
back to the world?
And giving back or
contribution is the third step
to fulfillment.
The Dalai Lama once said,
you want to be happy?
Make other people happy.
Contribution is where you make
a list of all the ways you
can contribute to pushing
humanity forward, whether it's
charitable giving, or
raising spectacular kids,
or volunteering, or
starting a company,
or building something
that can actually
make an impact in the world.
Contribution is that third step.
So really, the path
to fulfillment,
ask yourself the three
most important questions.
What experiences
do I want in life?
How do I want to grow?
And how do I want to contribute?
That is the new
form of goal-setting
that I think really leads to
spectacular, extraordinary,
fulfilled lives.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So in my book, "The Code
of the Extraordinary Mind,"
I share an idea that I
call the Godicle theory.
And the Godicle theory
is really my worldview.
The Godicle theory
suggests that we
are all particles of a
larger collective whole,
particles of God, or Godicles.
Now, I view the world this way.
But something interesting
happens when you take on this
view that humanity, all of
us-- you and me and every other
human being on Earth--
are simply cells of a
larger entity, an entity
that perhaps we call God.
You see, if we are cells of
a larger entity, if we are.
Godicles, then one of the
first things that comes to mind
is that we're all
in this together,
that every single
Godicle, or human being,
is here for a
particular reason, just
like every cell in your
body has its own purpose,
its own meaning, its
own reason for being.
Now, every cell in your
body works in synchronicity
to help your body thrive, to
help every other cell thrive.
The cells of the heart, if they
were to suddenly stop working,
every other cell in your
body eventually dies.
And I believe life
is like that as well.
Michael Beckwith said
there are no extra people
on Planet Earth.
If you are born, if you have
a pulse, you have a purpose.
And I believe that purpose
is to help our world.
And our world needs
every other cell
that composes our
world, this giant body,
evolve, grow, and progress.
And so when you think
about the world this way,
you realize that
in every decision,
we can make a decision that's
going to push humanity forward,
or we can make a decision that's
going to hold humanity back.
In every company, you can
be a humanity-plus company,
a company that is
actually contributing
to humanity's progress
through the ages
or a humanity-minus
company, a company that's
holding people back.
In work, in life, you always
want to be humanity-plus.
And as a side
benefit, studies have
found that when
you are doing work
that seems to have a mission,
a purpose, and that purpose
and mission is always for the
greater good of the world,
it leads to your own
internal fulfillment.
So maybe we are cells
in a larger being.
And maybe the entire point of
life is to really, like a cell,
do good for the larger whole.
And this is why we get rewarded
with that little happy juice
that we call fulfillment.
And so I ask people that
when they start companies,
or when they work, or
when they join a company,
they work on projects that
are pushing humanity forward.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The answer is I don't know.
Because if you're talking
about extraordinary
in terms of these
exceptional feats,
maybe they had a certain
biological mutation or quirk
in their DNA, like Wim Hof.
I mean, his body was studied.
And there were certain things,
certain genetics that he had
that gave him that advantage.
But the question is, what
really is extraordinary?
So diving with sharks
is extraordinary.
But that mother who gave
birth to three kids,
sacrificed her career so
she could stay at home
and raise three
amazing children,
isn't that equally
extraordinary in some degree?
So who actually gets to
define extraordinary?
I think extraordinary
is one thing.
Extraordinary is when
you are living life
on your own terms, what Jeffrey
Allen calls sovereignty.
You are living life based not
on the rules of the culturescape
but based on your own
rules, your own rules
that lead to your fulfillment.
And you are doing
things that are not just
keeping you fulfilled but are
pushing forward the human race.
So you could be a mom.
Or you could be a schoolteacher.
Or you could be a park ranger.
And your only job is to
basically plant and take
care of trees, but you're
doing it on your terms
because that brings you joy.
It makes you fulfilled.
It's elevating the human race.
And you got there because
you want to be there.
That is extraordinary.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So as we go through
life, the purpose
of the culturescape, the purpose
of the rules, and the rituals,
and the religions,
and the cultures
is simply to keep us safe.
It's because human beings
are born in such a complex,
multidimensional world.
And so to help ease
us along the path
so we can make better
decisions, we emulate.
We take on, through
social conditioning,
patterns of past generations
so that we can function
in this highly complex world.
The problem is some of these
patterns are good, right?
Learning that eating
vegetables is healthy is good.
But some of these patents,
or these rules, are bad.
I call these brules,
or bullshit rules.
Bullshit rules are rules that
evolve in the culturescape
to keep us safe and that we
blindly follow because we
think we need to stay safe.
Bullshit rules are
rules such as we
must worship a particular
deity in a particular way,
or that woman must dress
in a particular way
to not offend men, or that men
must prove their self-worth
in a particular masculine way.
There are whole
collections of brules
that emerged from our
cultures, from our religions,
from our politicians,
from our media.
And these brules keep
so many people stifled.
So you want to ask yourself, is
what you are following a brule?
Or is it an actual
beneficial rule
that helps you live
life on your terms?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Ultimately, I think the most
important thing is sovereignty.
It's the idea that you are
setting your own rules.
You're creating
your own boundaries.
You can listen to what
the culturescape, what
the mythologies, the religions,
the media, the education
systems of the
world tell you you
need to do to live a good life.
But you make your own decisions
based on what makes you happy.
And I think when
you can do that, you
will start to move along
the path of your mission
and your purpose much faster.
[MUSIC PLAYING]